Hello, my name is Olga Kazeeva. I am an accountant. I have been working as an accountant for more than 15 years.
Today I am a member of the Institute of Professional Accountants of Russia. I have experience in various fields of activity, both construction, production and communication.
Today we will study the accounting course, the primary documents, contractual activities and their reflection in the account.
Our course will consist of three sections. In the first section, we will discuss some concepts of accounting.
In the second section, we will learn about accounting and its analysis.
In the third section, we will study the accounting and tax accounting.
We will learn about the primary accounting documents and the economic contracts.
The tasks we will set are as follows.
We will learn about the structure of assets and passives of the organization as objects of accounting.
We will learn about the method of balance generalization and explain the properties of the basic balance equation.
We will learn about the structure of the accounting balance.
You will also need to understand the numbers of financial reports.
You will also need to understand the primary accounting documents and their significance for the financial and tax accounting of the organization.
You will also need to understand the significance of the economic contract in everyday business activity.
Such words as asset, passive, turnover, financial result may seem like Chinese grammar at first glance.
But it is not as scary and difficult as you may think.
Accounting
In general, accounting consists of two simple operations – addition and subtraction.
We will have to understand and believe this in the following examples.
You are managers of different levels.
Management is the ability to make decisions based on information about the economic processes that take place at your enterprise.
Accounting is the process of creating information about the financial situation of the organization to the relevant persons who are interested in its activities.
The process of creating information involves a certain procedure that includes the sequence of the accountant's actions,
as a result of which the data on the facts of the organization's economic activities are converted into accounting elements.
We can build a chain of the accountant's actions.
First, the primary documents are created. Primary documents are not always created by the accountant.
They are created by managers and other enterprises.
The primary documents, their data, are put into accounting registers.
The information from the accounting registers is used to form the accounting report of the organization.
What is it for?
The accounting report has its users.
All users can be divided into two groups – the group of internal users and the group of external users.
The internal users include the management, the financial analysis, accounting information for production or management,
the owners of the organization's property, the personnel of the organization, external users, shareholders,
members of the economic societies interested in the financial result, investors, creditors, potential agents,
partners within the framework of the group of interrelated organizations, and, of course, the controlling fiscal bodies,
tax authorities, law enforcement agencies, the audit firms and the statistical bodies.
To satisfy each user, different methods of data grouping and their detailing are used in accordance with the users' requests.
For example, the accounting balance and the profit and loss report are of the greatest interest to the organization's management.
These main reporting forms contain data for two consecutive periods – the past period and the previous reporting period –
and allow for direct monitoring of the main performance indicators of the enterprise.
All selection is carried out from the same data, the same data is obtained by different users.
These data should be identical, but their grouping methods may be different.
Various approaches to grouping and detailing accounting information are provided by the development and introduction of the main and auxiliary forms of analytical accounting accounting.
Let's talk a little more about the groups of users and their economic interests.
The shareholders, who we call the owners of the enterprise, transfer such resources as the investment in the established capital to the economic turnover.
These investments can be financial or material. In addition, the profit received from the enterprise's activities is also allowed to be invested in the enterprise.
Accordingly, the information on the risk of their decision, the profitability they expect to receive from the investments,
the opportunities and the expediency of the organization's investments, and the ability of the organization to pay dividends.
The next group of users is managers, employees, and the organization's personnel.
What can they invest in the organization? They invest their work, the services they have produced but have not yet paid, or the deposit salary,
the money that remains at the disposal of the enterprise. What information can interest them? Will they get their salary?
What can they invest in the organization? Will they get their salary?
The next group of users is the investors. They invest their money and hope to get some interest from the organization.
They are interested in whether they can temporarily pay the loans they are provided with, whether they will receive the corresponding interest, and whether payments will be made in their favor.
The next group of users is business partners of the organization. They are suppliers, contractors, buyers, customers, and lenders.
This group of users either imports goods by making goods loans, provides advance payments to the organization, or is transferred to the property lending.
They are interested in the information about the payment in advance of the rent, commission payments, and the discount of the sale, and the term of the payment in advance.
Another group of users is the state. They are the tax authorities, the state provides the money,
which is in circulation in the organization, in the amount of the tax obligations, in particular, the single social tax, the deductions to pension funds, and the salaries of workers.
They are interested in how much taxes and fees, duties, excises, and other non-tax payments will be transferred in due time.
They are interested in the information for statistical monitoring.
When can an accounting account be organized? It is known that as soon as we decide what to count, then we can talk about the organization of an accounting account.
Will we count cash and cashless money, debt, equipment, material values, unfinished production, and so on?
We will divide all the objects of accounting study into two large groups. We make two new definitions.
One group is called assets, and we will include all the organization's funds and their movements.
The other group is called passives, and we will include the sources of education and use of the organization's funds.
The organization's funds can also be divided into groups such as the main assets, non-material assets, and call them non-return funds.
The main assets are the buildings and structures that are built, and the non-return funds are the funds that are not used.
Let's see in more detail what will be included in these groups.
The non-return funds, as I said, are divided into the main assets and non-material assets.
The main assets include the buildings and structures that belong to the organization,
the work and power equipment, measuring and regulating devices, computing equipment, transport, tools, household inventory, and road infrastructure.
Non-material assets are those that do not have a material form, but also belong to the organization.
These are patents for inventions, trademarks, and the concept of Goodwill.
We will discuss this concept in more detail a little later.
The next group of non-return funds is the call funds.
The non-return funds include production reserves, unfinished production, and future periods.
We will define this as a name, and later we will give a more detailed explanation to these non-return funds.
The production reserves are materials, semi-finished products, and blanks for production and trading enterprises.
The call funds are used to account for ready-made products of production enterprises,
the funds in the accounts for the positions of your customers, that is, the product that you have already released but have not yet been paid for,
the money that is in the cash register and on the accounts of the organization, short-term financial investments of the organization, and other turnover assets.
Another group of funds is the withdrawn funds, which are temporarily or irrevocably withdrawn from the economic turnover.
The paid funds are irrevocably withdrawn from the budget, and the temporarily withdrawn funds are reimbursed taxes.
There is a tax on the added value of the acquired assets.
You buy the materials and pay the tax on the added value, and then you have the right to pay this tax after the acquisition of the assets.
The payments for the use of the bank's loans will also be counted in the withdrawn funds of the organization.
We have already discussed the assets of the organization.
Let me remind you that these are the main funds, non-material assets, long-term financial investments, unfinished construction, and income investments in material values.
All of these will be called non-returnable assets.
The non-returnable assets include stocks, raw materials, ready-made products, unfinished production, and short-term financial investments.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that long-term financial investments are included in the group of non-returnable assets,
and short-term financial investments, which the enterprise invests in a group of returnable assets for up to 12 months,
also include money and debtors' debts.
Another group of withdrawn assets is the payment to the budget, reimbursable taxes, and payments for the use of the bank's loans.
We have already discussed the concept of the asset of the organization.
The second part of the balance sheet will consist of passives or sources, which are used to purchase the organization's assets.
The passives can also be divided into three parts.
The passives are the organization's own funds, the loan funds, and a group of additional funds that will participate in the organization's money circulation.
The original, own funds that any organization receives when it registers are its fixed capital.
As the organization works, additional capital is formed.
The organization has the right to create various reserve funds, and gradually reserve capital is formed.
The organization earns profits. All commercial organizations in Russia are created to make profits.
This unallocated profit is also formed by the organization's own funds.
The loan funds consist of loans and loans, long-term loans, which are received for more than 12 months,
and short-term loans and loans, which must be returned within a year.
Additional funds are salary contributions, which are temporarily in the company's use,
the budget for taxes and fees, social insurance contributions,
and contributions to suppliers and other creditors.
And the reserve of the upcoming expenses.
We have divided the organization's assets into assets and passives.
Now we have to decide what to measure.
We have to measure the machines that the organization owns,
and measure the collective's labor investments, and calculate the organization's capital.
There must be a single, universal unit.
The measurers you know can be divided into natural, labor, and monetary.
Natural ones are used to determine the object.
We can count objects in pieces, in kilograms, in meters.
We need labor measurers to determine the amount of labor spent.
Whether it is a working day, an hour.
Monetary ones are used to reflect all objects in a single expression.
In the Russian Federation, the unit of a monetary expression is rubles, and this is regulated by law.
Natural ones can be divided into a group.
Natural ones are used to reflect the same objects, but with different quantities.
In order for all objects to be measurable, they must have a single expression.
This is the monetary expression.
The monetary expression of accounting objects ensures the reality of accounting indicators,
their compatibility with the organization's economic activity.
Now I want to give you a small example.
Imagine a fruit store.
What is in a fruit store?
20,000 rubles in cash, 100 kilograms of oranges, and 20 kilograms of apples.
Can you determine the total amount of goods in the store?
Is this information I am giving you enough?
No, you cannot.
You cannot add up the cash register and the apples in the boxes.
They are expressed in different units of measurement.
To bring them to a single denominator, to calculate them,
you need to add the information that oranges cost 50 rubles per kilogram,
and apples cost 60 rubles per kilogram.
You can add up the total amount of goods in the store, and you will see that it is 26,200 rubles.
Thus, a single monetary expression makes the elements of accounting information comparable.
Both the turnover of current bonds, the profits of assets, the sources of funds, and the creditor's debt.
What is a balance? How will the real life of an enterprise be reflected in the balance?
How do the assets of an organization, its assets, and the sources of its passive education reflect in the accounting balance?
We will see this with you in the examples.
Let's say that an industrial organization has a regular fund of 180,000 rubles.
This fund provides the organization with all the necessary funds for its production activities.
The main funds purchased for this money are 100,000 rubles.
The organization purchased raw materials and materials from the regular capital fund for 25,000 rubles,
purchased fuel for 5,000 rubles, and the bank had 50,000 rubles left.
We will write down the assets in the balance on the left, and the passives on the right.
The total amount of economic assets will be 180,000 rubles.
The right side will have a passive fund that contains only one position of the regular capital fund,
and this amount is also equal to 180,000 rubles.
Our enterprise was created, and it started. How will the facts of economic life be reflected in the balance?
Let's look at the examples. An enterprise acquires raw materials from a counteragent.
What happens to the balance? What economic operations should an accountant carry out?
How will this be reflected in the balance?
The raw materials are acquired, which means that the raw materials reserves have been formed.
The reserves are an active part of the balance. The asset is increasing.
The raw materials are acquired, but the enterprise has not yet paid the money.
This means that the debt to the counteragents appears.
The debt is a passive part of the balance. The asset and the passive balance have increased.
The debt to the counteragents is increased by transferring cash from the account of the organization of the raw materials recipient to the account of the counteragent.
How will the accountant be able to reflect this in the balance?
What economic operations should he carry out? What will the result be?
If the debt is reduced, the amount of money transferred is reduced.
The debt is reduced, the balance is passive, and the amount of money transferred is reduced.
The money was paid to the counteragent from the account.
The account is an active part of the balance.
The balance is reduced and is in the asset.
As a result of this economic operation, when the debt is reduced by transferring cash from the account of the organization of the counteragent,
the balance is reduced, both the passive and the asset.
The next economic operation is when the organization of the counteragent unloads the finished product from the warehouse.
The balance of the finished product is reduced.
The balance of the stock in the warehouse is reduced.
The stock and the finished product are active parts of the balance.
The asset is reduced.
At the same time, the enterprise has not received a payment for the finished product.
The article on the payment of the counteragent for the finished product is increasing.
This is also an asset of the organization.
This article is increasing.
What happened to the asset?
When the stock was reduced, the asset was reduced.
When the debt was increased for the finished product, the asset was increased.
The next economic operation is when the counteragent pays off its debt by transferring cash to the account of the organization of the supplier.
For example, for the materials.
The debt of the counteragent was in the asset.
The asset is reduced.
The money received by the counteragent is increased.
The money is transferred to the bank's account.
The asset is also increased.
The last example.
The organization receives a loan from the bank.
The bank has transferred a loan amount to the account of the organization.
How will this affect the balance?
If the money is increased, and the money is an active part of the balance, the asset will increase.
But the enterprise becomes a debtor of the bank for the amount of the loan.
The debt to the bank is a passive part of the balance.
The asset will increase.
The main concept in accounting is that the balance asset must always be equal to its passive part.
The main capital equation in accounting is that the asset is equal to the passive part.
The passive part is the capital of the organization plus some obligations of the organization.
This is the main capital equation in accounting.
You should remember that the asset is equal to the capital plus obligations.
This equation is used to determine the optimal structure of the organization's passives.
We can say that the economic meaning of the balance is that the acquisition of the organization's assets must be provided by the availability of the relevant sources.
But you know that nothing is taken from nothing, just like it doesn't disappear.
If there is a source, there is money, the organization's assets or resources can be acquired,
or the organization's materials, or money can be obtained at the organization's account.
The organization's resources can be the funds of the founders and participants, the so-called statutory capital.
The organization's creditors are obliged to use the assets as sources.
The so-called stable passives are selected from the passives.
This is the obligation that is legally postponed.
For example, the debt to the amount of the salary of the organization's employees for the past month,
the tax rate, the term of payment, which is also postponed compared to the end of the month.
Maybe you know that the salary is always charged on the last day of the month,
for example, in March, March 30, and the payment of the salary according to the collective agreement in the organization is expected on April 5, 8, 10.
The same way taxes are charged on the last day of the month.
Payment is provided by the Russian legislation, for example, a tax on the added value of the next month on the 20th,
or a tax on the profit on the 28th, the next month of the accounting period.
This is the group of obligations that are called stable passives.
What we have seen, several economic operations and their impact on the balance, suggests several conclusions.
The first conclusion is that any change in the capital and obligations of the organization should be accompanied by an increase or decrease in the share of its property.
That is, the passive changes, the asset changes.
The second conclusion is that when an operation is carried out, as a result of which the currency of the balance does not change,
but only the structure of assets or passives changes, only the structure, that is, the size of passives and assets should not change either.
In a normally operating organization, the size of the obligations of the organization usually corresponds to the amount
that creditors can expect when liquidating an operating entity, with an expectation of meeting their requirements in full.
The size of the capital in a normally operating organization corresponds to the value of the property of the organization,
the value of the property subject to transfer to the founders and participants in the event of liquidation of the organization.
It should be noted that the capital includes not only the statutory capital, the value of the property incurred when creating an organization,
but also additional and reserve capital, as well as the amount of unallocated profit.
If the result of the organization's activities in the previous accounting period was negative,
then the amount of the loss received when determining the capital is taken into account with a minus sign,
and in the forms of accounting, these amounts will be shown in round brackets.
Now let's talk about the size of the organization's own capital.
It should be noted that the organization's own capital can be determined based on the balance sheet of the accounting balance.
It can be converted and obtained that the organization's capital is equal to the organization's assets minus its obligations.
This equation is used to determine the value of the assets acquired at the expense of the organization's own funds,
and it is called the organization's pure assets.
If the organization does not have a reserve of the upcoming expenses, then the value of the pure assets is equal to the organization's capital.
That is, our equation for pure assets is as follows.
Pure assets are the organization's assets, reduced to the value of its obligations.
Why do we need to count pure assets? Why do we need to know what they are equal to?
When the size of the pure assets becomes smaller than the size of the declared statutory capital,
the Russian legislation should either reduce its statutory capital,
or change the organizational legal form, or be eliminated altogether.
Let's see how the change in the organization's assets and passive balance is reflected in practice when performing typical economic operations.
The life of an organization begins with its first entry balance.
For example, let's take an organization whose entry balance looks like this.
The main assets are 25,000 rubles, raw materials are 1,000 rubles,
cash is 2,000 rubles, that is, the total asset, the total organization's assets are 28,000 rubles.
The passive balance should include the sources that were able to generate these funds.
In the passive balance, the statutory capital is also worth 28,000 rubles.
The life cycle of the organization begins, economic operations occur.
Let's start with the following.
The raw materials are shipped from the warehouse to the production workshops, which are engaged in the production of products.
The workers are engaged in the production of products, they need a salary.
The workers are paid a salary for processing these materials.
Both the materials and the salary result in production costs for the processing of products.
But the products have not yet become ready-made products.
We will call these costs unfinished production.
The materials have already been used up, the technological cycle has already passed, and the workers have been paid a salary.
But the finished products have not yet been received, but have received an article called unfinished production.
As soon as the workers are paid a salary, the enterprise is in balance.
An article is formed, which is called the enterprise's debt to its workers.
The debt is the sum of the salaries received.
We will write it down in short in the balance, the salaries paid to the workers.
Our balance is introductory.
As a result of these two economic events, the enterprise acquires a new look.
The materials are released, the work is spent, the unfinished production is paid, and the employees are paid.
These articles are highlighted in color.
The enterprise's life cycle continues.
The next operation is the delivery of the materials, for which the enterprise has not yet paid.
The warehouses have been replenished, but the payment has not yet been made.
The bank has received and delivered money to the cash register for the workers' salaries.
The money on the accounts has decreased, and the cash register has replenished the money.
These operations, which have been carried out, are highlighted in color.
Pay attention to the table.
You can see the movement in active and passive articles.
In addition, you can see that the balance sheet changes.
The balance sheet of passive and active articles has changed to the same value.
This balance sheet is called the currency of the balance.
In other words, the balance sheet of the asset equals the balance sheet of the passive article.
The next operations in the life cycle of the enterprise include the export of the main resources,
the salaries are kept in the tax budget, and the main resources are worn out during production.
The cost is transferred to the produced product.
The wear of the main resources will reduce the value of the main resources, but the value of the unfinished production will increase.
When taxes are calculated from the salary, a new article appears in the passive article, such as the budget calculations.
Again, pay attention to the table you see on the slide.
New articles are highlighted in a new color.
As a result of six operations, you can see that six articles of the accounting balance have undergone changes.
The last operation we will consider here is the payment of the salary.
The employees of the enterprise no longer have to pay their salaries in full.
There is also a little money left in the cash register.
You can also see the articles that have changed over the course of several operations.
As a result, the balance currency at the time of the last operation is 28,017 rubles.
Under the influence of economic operations, there are completely different changes in the balance.
The asset can increase, the passive can increase.
When the asset and passive change, the balance currency can change.
We will list all the possible changes in the balance in a table.
We will describe them with the simplest equation, as I promised you, that the entire accounting account consists of operations of addition and subtraction.
In the first article, the asset is a plus-economic operation, a minus-economic operation, but it must still be equal to the passive.
In the first operation, the balance currency changes do not occur.
The changes were only in the asset.
One of the asset articles increased and caused changes in another article in the asset.
There was no movement in the passive.
These are four main operations that can be described as all the changes in the balance of enterprises.
We have already seen how the balance changes under the influence of economic operations.
Now let's look at the balance sections.
The balance assets contain only two sections.
The first section is called non-returnable assets, and the second section is called returnable assets.
The sum of these two sections is called the balance, or the result is called the balance currency.
The first section includes articles such as non-returnable assets, basic funds, long-term financial investments, and unfinished construction.
The second section, called returnable assets, includes articles such as reserves, debt, and money.
The balance assets include three sections.
Section number three is the balance assets, which include capital and reserves.
There is share capital, and the additional capital that arises during the organization's activities.
The reserves created form the reserve capital.
The profits of previous years, the uncovered losses of previous years, the unallocated profits of the report year, and the uncovered losses of the report year.
All these articles form the capital and reserves section.
The passive section is separately considered for their expiry date.
Long-term bonds, loans, and other passives form the fourth section of the balance.
Short-term bonds, such as loans, credit debt, income of future periods, and reserves of future expenses form the fifth section of the balance.
We call it the balance, or the balance of profits and losses.
It seems like this is the only document that can be compiled.
There are many types of balance. Let's try to understand their classification.
You can read more information in the e-book.
The balance is distinguished by the date of creation.
The passive balance, the current balance, the unallocated balance, and the liquidation balance.
The passive balance is the first balance that the organization has in its life.
You have already seen what the passive balance looks like.
It is the capital and property that can be acquired for the organization's funds.
Or the organization will be in debt to the funders.
The first types of balance are the passive balance.
The current balance is the balance that the enterprise has in its life.
They can be initial, intermediate, quarterly, or monthly.
And they can be the final balance at the end of the year.
In addition to these two types, there are also liquidated balances.
If the enterprise is on the verge of bankruptcy, but there is a chance to save it,
the liquidated balance is used to see where and in what place the articles need to be corrected.
The liquidation balance is used at the time of liquidation, but there are also several types of balance.
The first balance is at the beginning of liquidation, then the intermediate balance, after some calculations with the creditors,
and the final balance is at the time of liquidation.
The liquidation balance is used at the time of reorganization of the enterprise.
It can be divided into several small enterprises, or some of them can be joined.
In addition to the classification by date of composition, there are also several signs of balance.
The source of the balance is possible.
For example, the inventory, book, general balance.
If the balance is made after the inventory, then the balance is the inventory balance.
The next sign of classification is the volume of information.
The balance can be single or composite.
For small enterprises that are not part of a group of companies, it is a single balance.
Composite, consolidated balances are made for a group of enterprises or for ministries.
The balance can be based on the main activity or non-main activity.
The main activity of an enterprise is not the main activity of one of its units.
Let's say, an enterprise has a recreation base on the balance.
You can make a balance based on non-main activity on this recreation base.
The balance can be independent or separate based on the method of cleaning.
There are no balances.
In Russia, before the perestroika, balances were not cleaned.
There were balances that could be discussed for several hours without stopping.
What funds are there, how they are moving, what are the profits, what are the losses.
These were very large balances, up to 200 articles.
It was not easy to work with such balances, to analyze them.
There are no balances.
In these balances, some articles are to be scrapped.
For example, the main funds in the balances are shown by the residual value.
What does this mean?
This means the balance value of the main fund minus its amortization to the date of the balance.
The balances that contain the balance balance based on the results of some articles are called the balance no.
In Russia, they are now called the balance no.
They are called the balance balance.
These are the balances that we will work with, which we will consider,
which enterprises use most often in their activities.
The complete set of accounting reports for commercial organizations consists of six forms and an explanatory note.
I said that the most popular forms are the first accounting balance and the second account for profits and losses.
These are the forms that are of interest to all users of accounting.
In addition, these are two forms that are made up of intermediate accounting, both the final and the intermediate.
It is allowed not to make up the rest of the accounting forms quarterly and monthly.
These are the forms for annual accounting.
So, form number one is the accounting balance.
The balance includes and groups the economic funds of the organization in terms of types and placement,
the sources of the formation and the purpose of the organization, and the money meter for a certain date.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the accounting balances are made up for a certain date.
Either it is the end of the month, or the end of the quarter, or the end of the year.
You can choose any other date in your organization and make up the intermediate accounting, for example, for April 15.
This is if you need it for analytical purposes.
The criterion of the significance of the balance articles can be determined in percents from the balance currency.
It is static information and gives only a list of assets and passives of the company.
I would like to explain what is the significance of the balance currency in percents.
Let's say you have money in the organization's cash register at the end of the year, which is only 100 rubles.
And the balance currency is in thousands of rubles, that is, about 30,000 rubles.
Your 100 rubles to 30,000 is a very low share.
Is it worth showing these 100 rubles in the cash register when the total amount of property is much higher?
You can simply neglect these articles.
It makes no sense to show the balance with this article.
Let's say, the money is in the account, if there are more of them.
If there is also zero in the account, then there is no point in showing any figures in this article.
The next accounting form, form number 2, is called the report on profits and losses.
This form characterizes the financial results of the organization's activities during the accounting period
and contains data on income, expenses and financial results,
in total, the increasing result from the beginning of the year to the accounting date.
I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that you make the balance on a certain date,
and the report on profits and losses is made during a certain period from the beginning of the year to the accounting date.
The next form, form number 3, is the report on capital changes.
It is an analysis of the changes in net assets and capitalization of the organization as a result of economic activity.
It covers only the operations that directly affect the organization's capital.
The next form, form number 4, is the report on the movement of money.
This report shows the flow of money, their income and expenses as a result of several types of organization activities.
There are usually three types of organizations' activities.
They distinguish between the current activity, investment activity and financial activity.
This report is also made during the accounting period, in conjunction with the remains of money,
at the beginning and end of the accounting period.
One of the applications for the accounting balance, form number 5, does not have a special name.
This application is intended to provide users of the accounting balance with additional data,
which is a decryption of the main articles of the accounting balance.
The name of this form determines its strong relationship with the articles of the accounting balance,
based on their compatibility.
This data is necessary for users to assess the organization's financial and property position.
Another accounting balance form, form number 6, is the report on the use of targeted funds.
This form is intended for non-commercial organizations in Russia.
The following data can be taken from this form.
The use of income, membership contributions, voluntary contributions and the amount of other income.
The accounting balance is supplemented by an explanatory note.
It contains the necessary information about the organization,
the disclosure of which is provided by the Russian legislature,
and additional information that clarifies the data of other accounting balance forms.
It is used to clarify the turnover of the enterprise,
and the activity of the enterprise's funds.
The accounting balance form is established by the Russian Ministry of Finance.
After the form is filled, all commercial organizations
submit their accounting balance to the founders of the organization or the owner of the property.
The tax authorities and the statistical authorities submit their accounts to the tax authorities.
The accounting year under the Russian legislation is extended from January 1 to December 31.
The deadline for submitting the accounts is set.
The Russian Ministry of Finance also sets the deadline.
As I said, there is an interim report.
This is a report for a certain period of the organization.
It is needed for an immediate response to changes in the financial situation of the organization.
As a rule, an interim report for a quarter is also provided to the external users of the Tax Inspection
and some forms in the statistics.
The deadline is the last calendar day of the reporting period.
The reporting period is December 31 for the annual report,
and the last day of the month for the interim report.
The publicity of accounting reporting is in the publication of the reporting in newspapers and magazines
that are available to users of accounting reporting.
The publication is obligatory, and the accounting balance and the financial results report are subject to the obligation.
The publication is not obligatory for all organizations.
The accounting balance and financial results are published by the accounting companies and credit organizations.
No matter how well the accounting balance is done,
no matter how well the reporting is done,
no matter how well the requirements are met,
the reporting must be done with accuracy.
This is due to the fact that the perception of accounting reporting by different users,
unfortunately, can be different.
Let's look at some cases of paradoxical accounting situations.
For example, we have an organization.
It has a small balance.
The organization has the main funds for some amount,
let's say 2,000 rubles or 2,000 conditional units,
and the goods for 4,000 conditional units,
and the cash in the cash desk and the bank is also 2,000 units.
The balance has 8,000 units in total.
The sources that the organization's funds were formed with
are the established capital of 5,500,
the profit for the previous year of 1,500 conditional units,
and some credit debt that the organization has for 1,000 units.
The passive is also equal to the asset and is 8,000 conditional units.
The organization, which has such a balance, is going to make a large purchase,
to buy a car.
Everything is purchased for money or for the promise to pay them in credit.
The organization buys a car for 1,900 units.
In the table, you can see the movement of both cash and main funds
that were created in the organization's account, and the money was reduced.
What is paradoxical in this situation?
Pay attention to the fact that the money that was left on the organization's accounts,
100 conditional units, is now not enough to pay off the debts.
The passive debt is 1,000 units.
The profit is there, but the organization is not able to pay off the debts.
The profit is there, but the money is not.
This is a paradoxical situation.
The next situation.
The organization sells existing goods at a 10% discount.
The buyers have not received the money yet.
But the organization must show the profit it has already received.
10% of 2,000 goods, 200 units of profit, must be recorded in the balance passive.
The profit has increased.
Look at the article on cash.
There is no more money.
The profit is increasing, but the organization cannot pay off the debts.
The organization continues to produce goods.
But some of these goods are still in incomplete production.
All stages of processing have not yet been completed.
The finished goods are not formed.
The incomplete production has appeared in the balance asset.
And in the balance passive, the profit has appeared.
You see the increase in profit.
The profit has increased, but the money has not increased.
This is not a rare situation.
My director often asks me the same question.
I see the profit, but can we pay off the dividends?
We still don't have the money.
The money will appear as soon as they pay for the sold goods.
The next paradoxical situation.
The organization has acquired the right to use software products for five years.
50 conditional units have been paid for this right.
Since the organization will use these products for five years,
the expenses will be only one fifth of the total, 10 conditional units.
40 units of the paid money will be used as a full asset for future periods.
A new line appears in the asset.
The profits will decrease due to the fact that the organization has incurred costs
in the form of amortization of the right to use software products.
We have spent the money, but the result is not good.
The company's ability to pay has been reduced, and this may lead to bankruptcy.
The next situation.
Real money payments are not made when the company's current expenses are compared to the expenses of future periods.
For example, the organization has acquired a license for several years,
and every year the cost of the license is partially transferred to expenses.
The accountant creates a reserve of possible expenses,
increasing the expenses of the current period and showing the reserve in the passive account for the debitor's debt.
For example, a guarantee fund for the repair of its products has been created.
Another situation is when amortization of the main funds or non-material assets is attributed to the company's current expenses.
In these situations, the company does not make money payments.
Nevertheless, the size of the tax-obtained profit decreases,
the company's profitability decreases, and as a result, its value paper price drops.
Employees will be deprived of bonuses and other types of monetary incentives.
Although, in reality, the company does not seem to have spent any money.
The next paradox is the acquisition of values, but at the moment there has been no payment.
The asset grows due to the growth of the passive account.
The debtor will be in the passive account.
In this situation, the company's profit will not change.
Another situation is when the asset increases, but it does not influence the change in the profit.
Some of the values obtained in the order of target financing have become the company's property.
Under the terms of the contract, the company cannot dispose of them at its discretion until the term of the contract is over.
This situation will not influence the profit.
These actions have no productive nature.
Values obtained without compensation, for example, in the order of sponsorship, are transferred to the company by the car.
The car will not increase the company's profit, but it will increase the company's additional capital.
The next situation is when the company has increased the value of the main assets, and has overestimated them.
The value of the main assets has increased, and as a result, the amortization has increased.
But the amortization of the main assets will in turn reduce the profit of the organization.
Overestimating the increase in the value of the main assets often leads to a reduction in the profit.
The organization increases the prices of the goods sold.
The sales prices are taken into account, and the value of the property increases.
The profit of the organization will only arise when the goods are sold.
The next paradox is the situation in which losses will not arise.
The company will cancel its creditorial debt.
The creditorial debt is an active asset.
The asset will decrease, and the debt will also decrease.
But this will not lead to losses.
There is an increase in the balance, but there are no losses.
The values are transferred in the order of targeted financing.
The company has lost its ownership, but it controls the use of these objects by the recipient.
This is not an economic activity, and we are not talking about the profitability of this operation.
The prices of the goods sold have been reduced.
As a result, the sales price has decreased.
There are no losses, but the income of the organization will be somewhat reduced.
The overestimation of the entire property has been carried out.
Its value has decreased, and the additional capital has decreased.
This will not affect the profit of the accounting year.
In the course of the inventory, a shortage has been identified, but the culprits have also been found.
In this situation, there is no loss, but if the culprits are not identified, there will be a loss in the organization.
To summarize, each of the above reasons leads to the following.
The connection between the amount of profit and the changing value of the property is broken.
The financial result is not what it is shown in the accounting forms.
The property will be either overestimated, as it has no property insurance, or it will be difficult to sell it.
Or it will be undervalued, as the property is not reflected in the income.
Let's look at one more situation.
You can see some of the balance sheet on the slide.
The company will distribute dividends.
The first economic operation is to pay 500 dividend dividends to shareholders.
You can see these changes in the balance sheet.
A new article has appeared, which says that the shareholder will be paid.
The profit will decrease due to the addition of dividends.
Before their actual payment, this procedure will not change the balance sheet volume, the company's property structure, or the balance currency.
After the payment, the shareholder's cash balance has changed.
The value of the share is reduced by 500.
The debt in the balance sheet disappears.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the balance currency has changed.
Let's draw conclusions from this economic operation.
The value of the profit is not related to the income or loss of the property.
It is necessary to study the gap between the growth of the property and the value of the profit, which characterizes the company's successful activity.
Another situation.
The same amount can be considered as the income and the loss.
There are two positions.
The situation in the eyes of the owner and the situation in the eyes of the head of the organization, not the owner of the company.
The payment of dividends is part of the profit that will be paid to the shareholders.
The head of the company considers this procedure as direct expenditure of the company.
The shareholders could invest money in the bank, but they invested it in the shares of the company.
The head of the company could also go to the bank and take a loan.
Or, in this situation, the shares of the organization were sold.
The owner could either get a percentage of the money in the bank, or he could claim dividends from the shares of the company.
For the head of the company, this is the situation.
Again, pay interest on the loan, or pay dividends to the shareholders of the shares of the company.
The qualification of the fact of economic activity changes with the change of the point of view.
It will be either an expense or an income for the owner.
The organization can get different financial results with the real asset and its operation.
The paradox is that the organization buys three identical objects, three computers.
But it buys them at different prices and in different companies.
All these three computers will have different values for the organization.
One computer at a low price can be written off at once for the organization's expenses.
The other computer will be used for a year, and the price will allow it to be written off for the organization's expenses.
The third computer will be considered important for the organization, and will be put on record as the main asset.
It will be amortized for several years.
The object's value will be transferred to the cost of the produced product and services for several years.
The key factors in this situation are the price of the product and the importance of this product for the company.
The paradox is that one of the three identical computers is used, but it is not taken into account.
It is not listed by the organization.
Another paradox is when the accounting data is not equal to the actual data.
The company's values can be subject to natural loss.
You know about the loss of a cow, a cowgirl.
Any value is not protected from theft by the company's employees, buyers, and individuals in the state.
The real amount of losses can be identified only by inventory.
The longer the period of inventory, the longer the company's head stays out of sight.
The amortized property can never be presented in a real estimate, because the amount of its loss is always conditional.
The accountant can choose the minimum or maximum loss period.
The accountant's discretion, the discretion of the financial services, can be used to choose the amortization.
The company's money cannot be considered real from the future financial estimates.
For at least two reasons.
The purchasing power of the money is constantly changing.
The foreign exchange rate is constantly fluctuating.
The company's account amount is only a bank's debitory debt, in which its account is open.
It is possible that this debt will not be paid off.
There is another article on the future period expenses.
This is also a missing property, but the account shows this property in the asset.
Future period revenues are the revenues obtained by the property,
which are reflected in the profit report, thanks to the exclusive accounting methodology of capitalization of revenues.
The company's reserves are also purely conditional quantities of allegedly incurred expenses.
But it is very possible that there were no such expenses.
As I gave you an example, this is the creation of a guarantee fund.
If the fund is not paid, the expenses will be paid.
If the fund is not paid, the expenses will not be paid.
The funds are already created, and the funds are being calculated.
The additional capital is only a result of accounting techniques.
You need to increase the amount of an asset, but the source of this increase is unknown.
Then the accountants increase the additional capital.
When an asset is reduced in the estimate, the additional capital will also be reduced.
Accounting data is not equal to actual data.
All accounting data are conditional.
Please remember this.
The degree of conditionality of various accounting data objects is not the same.
The significance of accounting data should provide users with the acceptance of effective management decisions.
The amount of funds of the organization is not equal to their total value.
You know that a company can be sold as a property.
At this point, there are two estimates.
The company has two prices.
The price of the seller.
The company has a certain accounting value for the value of its property.
The seller estimates the company from the point of view of the actual profitability.
The buyer estimates the company from the point of view of the future profitability.
The buyer hopes to get the potential profitability from the management of the company.
The buyer and the seller's estimates differ.
The buyer will pay a higher price for the company.
This difference is called Goodwill.
After the transaction, Goodwill will be taken into account as a non-material asset.
This allows the company to reflect the investment of the company in the acquisition of third-party enterprises.
The company can show overpayments or underpayments when making these transactions.
Goodwill can be a negative.
The company as a whole can be sold with a loss.
Let's talk about the reliability of accounting data.
The company's profit over the course of its existence cannot be determined.
In other words, the number of profits is not meaningful.
Why?
The purchasing power of the money units changes.
During the operation of the company, the management usually re-evaluates the objects taken into account.
This procedure loses the meaning of the total profit.
The change in methods and the norm of amortization of the main assets during accounting also inevitably distorts the total profit.
Methodological methods in accounting lead to fluctuations in the profits of accounting periods and automatically distort the total profit.
Let's try to analyze the balance of the real organization.
Please, open the example of the company's accounting in your textbook.
This balance is given for two subsequent periods, the previous year and the previous year.
Let's do a horizontal analysis of the balance sheet.
The following table shows how the balance sheet changes in the asset.
I want to draw your attention to the fact that the balance of the currency has increased by 20.9% compared to the previous year.
The turnover of the assets has increased by 162.5%.
The stock of the material and production sectors has increased by 48.2%.
The turnover of the assets has increased by 14.3%.
This dynamic of balance changes contributes to the growth of the turnover of the assets.
Now let's look at the articles in the passive.
I want to draw your attention to the fact that the short-term debt has increased by 40.9% in the passive.
The long-term debt has also increased.
This change in the debt indicates a change in the structure of the capital and, accordingly, an increase in the financial risk.
To analyze the structure of the assets, we will refer to the scheme of division into the current and non-current turnover assets.
We will refer to the current turnover assets, the debt of the debtors and the reserves of the organization.
For example, the increase in the demand for money may be caused by the fast pace of the growth of the share of the debtor's debt in assets,
which is often associated with a slowdown in the turnover of the current assets.
For a deep analysis, it is advisable to study the aging of the debtor's accounts and the changes in the structure of the reserves.
If the changes are negative, it is necessary to pay attention to the management of the assets.
Let's look at the report on profits and losses, but in an unusual form, not in a table form.
This is an aggregated form of presenting this report, but in my opinion it has a more clear picture.
In the diagrams, you see the blue bars, the first left column is the total revenue received by the organization from the implementation.
This revenue will be reduced to the production cost of the produced product.
The next column is the total revenue of the organization, which will also be reduced to commercial and management costs.
The next column is the operating profit.
The operating profit will also be reduced to expenses unrelated to the main activity.
We have formed a profit before the tax is withdrawn.
The organization also has loans, which means that interest on loans must be reduced.
The organization has received a profit before the tax is withdrawn and other expenses.
The organization has paid taxes on profits, and other expenses, such as financial sanctions, have been paid to the organization.
The organization has received a net profit, which can be either recapitalized or paid out in dividends, depending on the owners.
I would like to draw your attention to the main sections of the report on revenues and losses.
These are the production cost of the produced product, commercial and management costs, and interest on loans.
The user who is not very experienced in financial analysis can conduct an express analysis of the accounting report.
The goal of the financial analysis is to obtain objective information on the organization's state, identify existing and outlined problems, and draw the organization's leadership's attention to them.
During the express analysis, changes in the composition of assets, changes in the structure of assets, and changes in the composition and structure of the organization's sources of funds are studied.
Negative trends are identified, for example, the share of the long-term debt that cannot be paid off has increased, or the profit of the organization, which is aimed at increasing its own capital, has decreased.
According to the annual report, there are articles that indicate the organization's unsatisfactory performance and poor financial condition.
For example, loans that were not paid off in time were identified.
The VEXs issued by the organization are overdue. The overdue debt and credit debt are due.
After the comparative analysis, the balance currency changes are calculated.
The calculation is based on the following formula. The balance currency is taken at the end of the year, divided by the balance currency at the beginning of the year, and divided by 100%.
Next, the profit change coefficient is calculated, which is the same as the balance currency change coefficient.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that both the profit and the profit are taken over the current year.
The results are compared. The ideal situation for an enterprise is when the growth rate of profit is greater than the growth rate of profit and balance currency.
In addition, the growth rate of profit should also be greater than the growth rate of balance currency.
In order to analyze the organization's financial activity, an aggregated, simplified balance is made.
For this purpose, the formation of assets is carried out. The amount of turnover assets is reduced by the amount of the debit debt for more than 12 months, and the amount of non-turnover assets is increased.
The balance assets are formed by the liquidity level. You can find the liquidity classes in your textbook.
In the passive, the short-term obligations are excluded from the section of the future periods income and the reserve of the upcoming expenses. In the article, the passive is formed on the term of obligations.
As a result, the balance has a much more compact look. I would like to draw your attention to the type of accounting equation.
The main equation is the following. The asset is equal to the passive. In a new form, it is described through the balance article.
The main balance assets, reserves, expenses, cash, short-term financial investments, accounts, debt, and other assets are equal to the passive.
The balance assets include sources of property, short-term loans, long-term loans, non-terms of interest, and accounts, debt, and other passives.
This is a new type of equation. During the financial state analysis of the enterprise, the debit debt must be analyzed.
Debit debt is a debt for the contract agent, and, accordingly, your lost material benefit.
Debit debt must be kept within 25-27% of the return assets. The lost material benefit can be calculated as the sum of the debit debt multiplied by the number of days of this debt divided by 364 days and multiplied by the refinancing rate of the Central Bank.
The accounting equation is usually analyzed in four directions.
Payability is the ability of an organization to pay its debts on time. Sometimes, instead of the term payability, they refer to liquidity or payment, i.e., the ability of certain assets to be sold.
The liquidity of the balance shows to what extent an organization is able to pay its current short-term debts. This is represented graphically.
As an example, I will show a graph of the real-working organization. Current obligations are marked in red, and current assets are marked in blue.
I want to draw your attention to the fact that since 2007, the organization has had problems. It is clear that the organization does not have enough return assets.
The organization's management spends money on repairs.
The company was offered to stop the repairs until the organization regained financial stability.
The so-called coverage coefficient is defined as the ratio of return assets to short-term obligations. The recommended value of this coefficient should be at least 2.
A higher value can be obtained by accumulating difficult-to-achieve, and sometimes not liquid, stocks of raw materials or unfinished production.
If the enterprise seeks to the highest level of liquid returns, it may miss the opportunity to invest this money in projects that could bring good income in the long term.
Another coefficient of liquidity is the quick liquidity, or, as some literature calls it, the refined liquidity. This is a more representative value than the coverage coefficient.
It is calculated as follows. Return assets minus raw materials and short-term obligations. In practice, it is much more difficult to get debts from debitors than to liquidate your stocks.
You need to analyze the nature and quality of the debt, taking into account the term of liquidation, the presence of overdue debt, and the level of dubious debt.
The critical level of this coefficient is usually taken as 1. The third coefficient of liquidity is the absolute liquidity. It is calculated according to the formula of high-liquid assets to short-term obligations.
The value of this coefficient should be within 0.2-0.3. All three indicators are calculated together. They are convenient for comparing liquidity of a particular organization with data of similar organizations or with average indicators.
Any external user can check and carry out this procedure. The next indicator of the company's financial stability is its profitability.
The profitability indicator is used to assess the organization's profitability. It is also called the profit margin indicator. This is the relationship between the organization's net profit and the revenue from the implementation.
The profitability indicator of the sales characterizes the most important aspect of the organization's activities – the implementation of the main product, as well as the share of the cost in sales.
The profitability of all its assets, the profitability of stable sources of total capital, and the profitability of its own capital can also be determined by the similar formula.
The next indicator of financial stability is the turnover. The turnover indicator reflects the volume of asset or passive changes in general or specific assets and passives for a certain period.
The term turnover implies the decapitalization of assets and the cancellation of passive obligations. The general formula for determining the turnover is the ratio of the turnover per balance article to the average value of the article per period.
To determine the average value of the article per period, the value of the article per period is taken at the beginning of the period plus the value of the article per period at the end of the period and divided in half.
I have included some types of turnover in the table. You can read it and try to calculate the indicators yourself using the example of the balance sheet.
For example, the turnover of the debtor's debt, the turnover of the reserves, the term of the realization or the period of the turnover of the reserves. These formulas can be calculated.
One of the key issues in the analysis of the financial situation of an organization is the study of sources of financing and the assessment of financial stability.
Usually, indicators are used to characterize the structure of capital, which reflect the share of the own capital and the debt capital in the total balance.
In fact, these indicators are interchangeable. The first indicator is the financial independence. The organization is determined by the formula as the ratio of its own capital to the balance sheet.
The second indicator is the debt dependence. The same is true for the debt capital as a result of the passive. It is enough to calculate any of these indicators to understand how financially dependent or independent the organization is.
To analyze the organization's reporting, you need to get information from external sources related to the study. This can be information from your common counterparts, press, electronic media, for example, about alleged tax violations, etc.
You need to get a full accounting report of the organization, including an audit report, if it is provided, and an explanatory note. You need to get other documents related to internal business process regulations, including, for example, the organization's accounting policy
The accounting report allows you to make weighted management decisions in your company's activity, including the assessment and selection of counterparts, partners in joint activities, as well as management decisions for the adjustment of the company's strategy and business processes